Good afternoon.
Welcome to the afternoon session.
This is actually my
second WWDC presentation.
So,
relatively new to Apple in that respect,
and one of the growing group of Unix
professionals that we're finding
in the CoreOS group at Apple,
which is very good to see.
A very strong Unix
background in the group.
So today, we're going to be talking
about kernel programming,
writing kernel extensions for Mac OS X,
and in particular,
what we've done in Tiger and how
that's going to be affecting you.
So we've made some major changes
to the kernel in Tiger for
a number of good reasons.
And to be perfectly honest,
most KEKs are going to be
unaffected by these changes.
But there are a small number
that will be affected.
And what we'll be doing,
talking today about,
is how these changes affect those KEXs.
There will be source changes
needed to be made to these KEKs,
and we'll cover what they
are and what you need to do.
So what you'll learn today is why these
changes to the kernel are necessary,
which KEXs are affected,
what changes are needed,
techniques you'll need to apply so
that your KEXs will work correctly,
How kernel interfaces are managed,
the lifecycle of a kernel interface,
and generally why what
we've done is a good thing.
So just so that you know what
we're talking about today,
this is what I would consider
to be basically the Core OS,
the core of the operating system,
the Unix part of OS X.
And what we're talking about today
is pretty much the BSD file system
networking area and the changes
that we've made in this space.
So let me discuss a bit about the
problem that we've been facing.
So here we are,
back at the kernel and the core system,
and we have your KEXT.
So you load your KEXT into the kernel.
This particular one is a networking KEXT,
but it's true of others.
And there are
Parts of the KEXT that have
got functional references,
and these references are fine.
We can tell what they are.
These are unresolved
symbols in your KEXT,
and we can understand those.
But some of them are really
unsustainable from our perspective.
They're reaching into parts of
the system that we really consider
to be an implementation detail,
as opposed to what we would consider
to be a supportable interface.
In addition,
there are a whole set of what I would
call detectable data references.
These are things where you've
referenced certain data structures,
and the symbols for those are
therefore unresolved in your text,
and we can see that
you're touching those.
But some of these are also what we
would consider to be unsustainable.
They're pointing into data structures
that we really consider to be private or
an internal part of the implementation,
as opposed to anything that you should
be using as a programming interface.
But worse still is that there's a
whole set of indirect data references.
This is where you've gone
into a data structure,
and inside that data structure
there's a pointer to something,
you've followed that pointer,
you've picked another
pointer out of there,
and you've potentially
gone all over the kernel.
And we have no clue as to what
it is that you're referencing.
And clearly some of those are
very unsupportable as well.
Simon Patience, Dean Reece
But the problem is that we consider
binary compatibility to be paramount,
and yet we have no visibility in
what was actually being depended on.
So what has happened is that kernel
development was grinding to a halt.
There was lots of big features
that we wanted to implement that we
just couldn't do because we would
almost certainly break somebody.
Part of the problem was that we
didn't actually know who it was
that we were going to break either.
So we had to make changes very,
very cautiously.
The bigger problems was that new
hardware support was extremely hard.
And in fact,
one particular example of this
was when we introduced the G5,
we had to obsolete the interface
for called PMAP Extract,
which was really not a
programming interface that
we would want it to export.
We actually had a perfectly good one.
We were using IOMemory descriptors,
but not everybody used it.
So new hardware support was
becoming more difficult,
and we certainly saw that this
was going to become increasingly
more difficult as time went by.
We were limited in the number of
new features we could implement
because of the disruption that that
would have potentially to data or to
implementations where we'd have to
change interfaces inside the kernel.
It even got to the point where
performance optimizations couldn't
be done because we would have to
move things around and therefore
potentially break things.
Some bugs were not being fixed because we
couldn't add fields to data structures.
In general, the code paths in the
kernel were being warped,
and despite all this,
we'd still find that developers
would occasionally break.
So, we decided that we had
to bite the bullet,
and Tiger is the release
to make progress.
We needed to desperately,
or add desperately needed functionality,
What we wanted to do also was
to extend the I/O Kit experience
where you had stable interfaces,
and extend that experience
out to the rest of the kernel,
so that KEX could be given much
stronger guarantees of binary
compatibility from release to release.
As I mentioned before,
I/O Kit KEX are unaffected,
and that's by far and away the
majority of kernel extensions.
But we will be breaking binary
compatibility for a very few keks.
And these keks are really the
ones that are dependent on the
com.apple.kernel.bsd sets of symbols.
And we'll talk about that more later.
So as I said,
we needed to add new functionality,
and so we have a new
heart for Tiger's Kernel.
SMP support is clearly a big thing.
If you notice that all
our G5s are now SMP,
are all dual processors.
The previous funnel architecture
was just not serving them well.
So we had to radically change that.
64-bit application support is
another new feature in Tiger.
If you have a 64-bit processor,
64-bit applications seem to
make an awful lot of sense.
File System Access Control List.
This is a feature that people in
the enterprise space have been
pushing for for quite a while.
And now we've had the opportunity
to perform certain optimizations.
One of the most,
biggest examples of this that I can,
that came up recently was that there's a
certain amount of data attached to every
VNode for read and write operations.
Now, not all VNodes have,
are read to and written to, for example,
directory VNodes.
And even if they are,
do have IO associated with them,
it's normally of one type or the other.
This, this lump of data that's attached
to the VNode was actually bigger
for write than it was for read,
but it was present on all VNodes,
and read operations are far
more frequent in the system.
And so we've been able to actually
change the data structure,
remove those, those extra pieces,
extra fields,
and only attach them when the VNode
is in that appropriate operation.
And doing this actually saved us
a megabyte of wired memory space.
So this is non-trivial stuff that we're,
we're dealing with.
And finally, as I said,
there were bugs that we could fix.
The fact that we can now add a field
to a data structure without potentially
breaking something has actually allowed
us to go in and fix some bugs that we've
had hanging around for a little while.
So improved SMP support, at last.
People have been asking
this for a long time,
especially in the server space,
where they've noticed
that the funnels are,
servers tend to operate in one mode,
so they'll be doing sort of a
lot of networking operations,
or a lot of file system operations,
and so therefore they
can't take advantage of the
split funnel quite so much.
And so they've been hitting
this contention on the funnel,
so finally we're getting to break
it out and remove it from our code,
insert finer-grain locking.
I use the word finer on purpose here,
we're not going down and
locking every last little thing,
we're trying to put the granularity at
the right level for efficient operation.
We've also taken the opportunity
to restructure a bunch of code.
As I mentioned earlier on,
code was sort of kind of getting
warped around because we had to
tread carefully not to break binary
compatibility in the first place.
And now we've been able to streamline
the algorithms much more successfully,
which has actually led to
some performance improvements.
And we can reorganize the data
to associate the data with the
locks that are protecting them.
So in Panther, this is really what
the system looked like.
We had, as you went in through the user
space system call entry point,
we took the big kernel lock.
And as you passed down through generic
system call handling and perhaps the
file system descriptor handling code,
down through, say,
file structures and into the file system,
you were holding this
one lock at the time,
and the kernel was
fundamentally single-threaded.
And you'd go right the
way down to the I/O layer,
and once you got into I/O Kit,
then that lock was dropped and
you were back into a much more
parallel environment again.
If you were doing networking calls,
then you'd still take the same
lock as you came into the kernel,
and then you'd go down through
those layers again into the
networking side of things,
where we'd drop the kernel funnel
and take the networking funnel,
and then the entirety of the networking
stack would then be single-threaded
from networking's perspective
down to the device layer again.
So there was a very, very coarse level of
synchronization within the kernel.
This has all sorts of
interesting problems,
apart from the obvious
parallelism problems,
but it's amazing how lazy you
can get when you believe that
nobody else can mess around
with you while you're executing,
and you can start accessing random data
structures without any real discipline.
So what we now have is much finer
grain locking in the kernel,
with locking at most levels of the
system being independent from each other.
The locks are either at the subsystem
level or at the object level.
So here's subsystem level locks
where basically there's a single
lock to be able to allocate M-Buffs,
for example.
And then there are other locks which are
held actually on the individual objects.
So we're actually intelligently looking
at the granularity of locking that
needs to be held at all layers of
the system so that we don't introduce
arbitrarily fine-grained locking which
would increase performance overheads,
or have too coarse a grain level
which means you wouldn't get the
parallelism that you would like.
So we believe that we actually
have a reasonable level of locking
granularity throughout the system.
Our general philosophy is that we
start coarse and then move finer
grain as we've determined that
there are performance issues.
Another big feature, 64-bit support.
In Panther,
the support was somewhat limited.
We gave you
We also gave you access to
64-bit instructions and 64-bit
registers for performance reasons.
However, the usage for those tended to
be in assembler leaf functions,
so it wasn't universally applicable.
However,
it allowed certain very important
mathematical operations to be optimized
to take full advantage of the processor.
This addresses a couple of the
dimensions of 64-bit support in terms
of large physical configurations and
some performance benefits that you can
get from using a 64-bit architecture.
In Panther,
we've decided we want to be able to
leverage the full power of the G5,
and so we're supporting 64-bit
non-GUI Unix applications.
So that basically means we're
providing a 64-bit lib system,
and that's it.
The reason we're doing this is because
we're aiming at applications which tend
to have a naturally large data set.
So these are compute-intensive
applications in general.
And these tend to come
from the Unix world.
what we've had to do in the kernel is add
support for multiple ABI's so we have to
be aware of the fact that system calls
can come through either from a 32-bit
application or a 64-bit application
which means that they have different
address bases and therefore different
sized pointers and the structures within
the kernel or the structures that they
passed to the kernel I should say could
be different formats and so we had
to be able to deal with that a lot
of that's been at the system call entry
time but there's other places in the
kernel that do that we had to make
changes to support a large address
space breaking the four gigabyte barrier
But of course,
if you have a non-GUI application,
you probably want to have a
GUI application to represent
the results of your app.
And so we've had to do 32- to
64-bit ABI interoperability.
So we have done various different shared
memory IPC kinds of communication paths
between the apps with different ABIs.
File System Access Control Lists.
Fundamentally,
the changes that we've had to do is to
centralize the credential checking for
authorization to access to operations.
Basically,
eliminating the UID/GID comparisons
that you've seen sprinkled
throughout the system.
We have new kernel interfaces
for these checks that are,
I hesitate to say capability-based
because it's not a capability system,
but effectively,
given an object and your credentials,
this is the operation that you'd
like to apply to this object.
Do I have permission to do so,
or do I have the authorization to do so?
And we've also enabled native file
system support for ACLs through
change in the VNode interfaces.
So...
Given the changes to the
kernel that we've made,
what are the changes that you
will have to do for kernel
programming for your kegs?
So we discussed this last year.
We've added a whole set of formal
kernel programming interfaces in Tiger.
I/O Kit already had its own
set of formal interfaces,
so I/O Kit KECs are
basically unaffected by this.
The KEX types that we're supporting in
the BSD side of things are file systems,
network extensions, and filters.
There's probably a few more details,
but that's fundamentally
the set of KEX that we're
supporting through these KPIs.
One of the big things is that there's
no more open and indiscriminate access
to all of kernel code and data being
supported by these formal interfaces.
Now we understand that there are some
KEKs for various reasons might want to
get access to the whole of the kernel.
We would advise that not
to be in product code,
simply because these KEKs,
if they do get kernel access,
or access to the whole of kernel symbols,
will be tied to exactly
one kernel version.
So whenever we update the kernel,
those KEKs will not load.
However, if you use the KPIs,
you're guaranteed release to
release binary compatibility,
and of course, source compatibility.
So what do the KPIs do?
They basically encapsulate all
the kernel objects that want to
be accessed by Kernel Extensions.
We've made all the data structures
opaque so that you don't have to go and
access the data structures directly,
which means that these data
structures are now invisible to you,
and we can change their organization.
We can add fields and do whatever.
However, you can still get access to the
information contained in these
data structures by using accesses.
Perhaps more importantly is that the
locking that we've implemented for
synchronization for these various objects
is completely hidden behind the KPIs.
All the objects are reference counted,
so when you access an
object in the kernel,
you have to formally look it up,
basically,
do the operations that you wish to,
and then release it.
Not doing this will cause leakage in
reference accounting that will cause
problems and bugs in the system later on.
So, basically what I'm saying is
that the semantic model for
a lot of the objects within,
or the data structures in the kernel
has changed because of this reference
counting and because of locking.
So, don't be fooled into thinking
that you can just take,
you know, the Veno pointer that you used
to have and do all the operations
that you used to and just sort of
recast the pointers that you were
getting back from the lookups,
because this won't work.
We've also gone through and changed
names of various interfaces,
data structures within the kernel.
And we've done this intentionally.
It's not just to annoy people.
It's basically to give you a
strong signal that the semantics
of that object has changed,
and you have to re-look at that
code and change your code to reflect
the semantics of those objects.
As I was mentioning before,
you can actually use all of the kernel.
And if you don't use those KPIs,
and you decide to go off and get
a hold of a data structure that
is encapsulated within the KPI,
you can do that.
However,
you must understand and correctly
honor all of kernel locking and the
changes that we make to that over time.
So this is really not a great idea.
However, using the KPIs,
the kernel implementation of
those objects does not affect you.
And so therefore,
whatever we do will still
remain compatible for you.
So the other thing that is going to
affect you is that we've removed the
funnel significantly from our code.
The funnel in the seed
is certainly still there.
There's large parts of the system
that are still protected by it,
but that's being removed as we progress.
So you should be aware of the
fact that what you're seeing is
development work in mid-cycle.
But the goal is to remove the funnel
from Apple code before we ship Tiger.
What this means is that the kernel
is no longer single-threaded,
and as it passes through
kernel extension code,
there could be multiple threads
passing through this now.
So,
your KEKs need to protect their own data.
If you have data inside it,
you have to be aware of the fact
that there could be multiple
threads trying to access this,
and so therefore,
if you need any atomicity,
you're going to have to do this.
And to do that, we have a rich set of
synchronization primitives:
spin locks, mutexes, reader/writer locks,
and some atomic
operations for you to use.
By and large, we think that the mutex is
actually going to be the one that
you're going to be using most.
We also recognize that it
might be difficult for some
KEKs to become multi-threaded.
Multi-threading is supporting SMP,
and locking is actually
not a trivial exercise,
as we found out.
So, there may be times where you
actually want to be able to load and
still be protected by the funnel.
And so we do have single-threaded
funnel executions supported.
For example,
as you pass through the VNode layer
and going into the file system,
we will take a funnel operation that will
allow your code to be single-threaded.
So because we've added all
these lovely synchronization
primitives for you to use,
it would be rather unfair not
to help you debug them because
locking is a tricky business.
So we've added a whole bunch of
things to help you debug your code in
the face of deadlocks and so forth.
So we have a bunch of things
for lock debugging for mutexes.
As I said, we expect that mostly you'll
be using mutexes in your code.
So for mutex locks,
you can get the current
owner for the mutex,
and if you've got a read/write lock,
if it's held exclusive,
you'll get the owner for that.
The PC of the last time
that the lock was held,
so you know where in your
code that lock was taken,
and who it was that took it,
as in the thread.
Also, there's an option where you can
actually get the backtrace of
that last lock for eight frames.
This will indicate the path that you
got down there because frequently,
you know, you've taken the lock in some
sort of generic function.
You have no idea who it
was that's called it,
and it was called in one
of 40 different places.
So we give you the backtrace option
to find out exactly the path that
you took to get to that lock.
We also have some runtime checks to help
prevent you from getting into trouble.
We assert that you actually own
the lock when you unlock it.
We don't allow one thread over
here to go off and lock something,
and then effectively hand the object
off and be unlocked by somebody else.
That's generally considered
to be very bad style,
and leads to a lot of almost
undebuggable situations.
And so we just assert that you
have to own the lock to unlock it.
If you've taken the lock exclusive,
we detect that you've
just taken it again.
That's almost certainly not
what you really meant to do,
because that implies that there's two
code paths that want to use this lock
in an exclusive mode at the same time,
even if it's the same thread.
And so we detect that.
We make sure that in the interfaces that
require synchronization locks that you've
actually passed the right lock type in,
and you're not getting
confused and giving a simple
lock where a mutex is needed.
And this one is again a
stylistic thing in some respects.
That we, if you take a lock and
you need to go to sleep,
we assert that you actually
don't hold any resources that
prevent you from going to sleep.
In particular, that means another lock,
basically.
If you're going to sleep for
long times in the system,
then you shouldn't be
holding kernel resources.
If you're waiting for I.O.
or something of that nature,
if it's a non-bounded sleep,
then you shouldn't be holding
kernel resources because
that will lead to deadlock.
We also have some log
statistics being kept.
My light's gone off here.
Is it working?
Okay.
Sorry about that.
So lock statistics, sorry about that.
So how long the lock has been held for?
Average and maximum lengths of time.
Clearly you don't want to hold
locks for very large periods of
time because that will increase
the likelihood of contention.
We also count how many times
the lock was contended.
When you take mutexes,
we hang around and look if the lock
holder is still active on another CPU.
If the lock is held by
somebody on another CPU,
then we don't immediately go to sleep.
We sort of wait for a bit just to
see if they're going to be holding
the lock for a short period of time,
and then you'll immediately jump
in as soon as they release it.
So we differentiate between contention
and actually sleeping on the lock.
If the lock is held by
somebody on another CPU,
then we don't immediately go to sleep.
We sort of wait for a bit just to
see if they're going to be holding
the lock for a short period of time,
and then you'll immediately jump
in as soon as they release it.
So we differentiate between contention
and actually sleeping on the lock.
So for 64-bits, in the kernel,
We thought about how best
to address this issue,
the fact that you've got two different
kinds of address spaces out there.
So we decided that we would represent
user addresses in the kernel as 64-bits,
regardless of whether it's a
64-bit process or a 32-bit process.
So the kernel data type for
a user address is 64-bits.
Whenever you actually access
the user address space,
the accesses needed that you use
to access it have been changed.
Their signature has
changed because of this.
So if you use things like
copy in and copy out,
or UI or move,
then those interfaces have also changed.
Whenever you actually access
the user address space,
the accesses needed that you use
to access it have been changed.
Their signature has
changed because of this.
So if you use things like
copy in and copy out,
or UI or move,
then those interfaces have also changed.
So for file system ACLs,
as I mentioned earlier on,
we have a new authorization model with,
and have eliminated all the
UID/GID comparisons in the kernel,
and have used this new
centralized credential manager,
sorry, centralized authorization
service called KAUF.
In addition, we have new credential
management interfaces.
You can't cons up your own credentials
and hand them off to the system because
these things are now reference counted,
so you have to create them and
manipulate them through KPIs.
We have, as I mentioned,
this sort of authorization model,
which is a capability checking interface.
Am I capable of performing
this operation on this object?
And this is actually extendable.
We have pluggable authorization
policies that you can insert
into what are called scopes,
which gives you the ability to
contribute to the decision-making as
to whether somebody can perform this
operation on this set of objects.
This was covered in the
Fastest in ACL talk yesterday,
and I hope people caught it.
But failing that, if you would like to
catch that on your DVDs,
it will be explained
in a lot more detail.
So we also have added native
support for file system ACLs.
And if your file system
does support ACLs,
then there are new VN Ops to be able to
plug into to be able to export those.
For file systems that
don't support native ACLs,
if they do support extended attributes,
we have new VNOps4 to support
extended attributes natively.
And if you have those,
then we actually store the ACLs
in the extended attributes.
If your file system
doesn't support either,
then we store extended
attributes in Apple double files,
the .underbar files,
and then ACLs are then stored in
the extended attributes in that way.
So even if you don't have
any of these features,
we'll still expose them to
the user by smoke and mirrors,
basically.
But this gives you the opportunity
of taking existing file systems
from other Unix systems that already
have these advanced features,
and now being able to support
them natively within OS X.
So at this point,
I'd like to welcome Dean Reece,
who's the manager of the I/O Kit team,
to talk about how access to kernel
interfaces is managed within the system.
Good afternoon.
Okay, so first I'd like to talk a little
bit about some extras that you're
getting with your -- I guess
it's available on the website,
the Apple Developer Connection
website content for this page,
for this session.
We've got several interesting
new tidbits for you to help with
your kex development for Tiger.
In no particular order,
we've got a plugin for
FireWire debugging.
Basically, this allows you to do the
two-machine GDB debugging
through a FireWire connection.
Functionally,
it's similar to the Ethernet
debugging that you can already do.
It's got a few advantages,
one being that it's available much
earlier during boot and sleep/wake.
So if you're trying to
debug a sleep/wake problem,
you have earlier access.
Also, we've got a new command
called kexsim for GDB.
If you're connected to another machine,
and you have Kernel Extensions loaded,
and you like to generate
symbols for those,
rather than having to
generate them manually,
you can run kexsim and point
it at a folder on your local
machine that has all the binaries.
Yeah, we definitely appreciate
having this internally as well.
So basically,
it will generate symbols for all loaded
kernel extensions in a single command.
We've also got a Perl script,
a little utility called Kextract.
Now, this is something,
it's a bit of an experiment,
but as Simon said earlier,
we have a situation where we have
a lot of KEXT developers out here
doing really cool development,
but we don't have a good understanding
of what all you depend on,
what specific APIs you're using and why.
So this is sort of the beginnings
of a feedback mechanism.
And what Kextract does is you run
it against your kernel extension,
and it basically extracts
a whole lot of information.
Basically, it's looking at the P list,
and it's looking at the
undefined symbols in your binary.
And it formats that into a little
text file that you can send
to Apple by way of Radar Web,
or Bug Web.
And we're going to keep these in a
database that will allow us to search.
Anytime we want to make a change,
or if we're just curious
who's using an API,
we'll be able to find any
kernel extension using it.
We'll be able to trace it back to
the developer who submitted it.
This is purely voluntary.
We're going to be using this, again,
it's a bit of an experiment.
It's not a certification program.
There's no guarantees made.
But this will be a good way for you to
let us know what it is you're using,
and it'll be a good way for us
to find out and possibly contact
you about upcoming changes.
So I think this could be very useful.
So we've also got a new kernel
available on the website.
This is probably the single
largest piece of the download.
But the kernel that actually shipped on
the TigerSeed still has a few KPI bugs
in it that we wanted to get fixed so
that you could play around with it.
But it was a little late in the TigerSeed
development cycle for us to be putting
kernel changes in for something that
wasn't critical path for the release.
So if you're going to be doing
KPI development or kex development,
you're going to be using the new KPIs,
you should install this kernel.
You should only install this
kernel on top of the WWDC seed.
And there's a readme in there that has
instructions for how to install it.
We've also got some documentation
and examples in the image.
The examples are works in progress.
The two file systems that we have
there are WebDAVFS and MSDOSFS.
These are the source code for the actual
binaries that shipped on the tiger seed,
so you're looking at the same thing
that we actually send in to get built.
And as I said, they're works in progress.
These are not in their final form,
but they do work using the KPIs and
it'll give you something to look at,
sort of a starting point.
We've also got a couple other
examples that are not shipping code.
They're just specific,
tight examples of one or two KPIs,
one for filters and one for a socket
filter and one for an IP filter.
The documentation that's on
the site is a collection of
HeaderDoc and some RTF files,
sort of porting guides, to help you, one,
go through and actually examine
the KPIs and their intent and
their parameters and so on.
And the porting guide is a
little bit more of a tutorial,
basically trying to walk
you through the process.
And it was actually written as an
experience that we went through
doing -- porting our own file
systems and such to the KPIs.
Obviously,
as this whole KPI process moves forward,
we'll make more information available,
but this should be enough
to get you started.
Okay, to talk about Kernel
Extensions a little bit.
We're making use of something
called Interface KEXTs.
Now, fundamentally,
they look and feel like
any other Kernel Extension,
but there are a few
special things about them.
We actually introduced
this concept in Panther,
and you might remember me
talking about them last year,
but we didn't really use them until now.
The best way to think of them is they're
a library mechanism for the KPIs.
The KPIs, as you know it,
are built into the kernel,
so they don't really need a KEXT,
but we're using the KEXT mechanism
as a way of managing and
versioning the interfaces.
So they really only contain linkage.
They don't contain any
implementation whatsoever.
I'll actually show you some diagrams in a
bit that show you how the linkage works,
but fundamentally,
it's just a big symbol table
wrapped in a KEXT bundle.
So what will happen is in the past,
your kernel extensions
linked against the kernel.
And for Tiger and going forward,
they're going to link against
these interface keks instead.
And that will have the advantage of,
of course, allowing us to have multiple
versions of the same API set or same
KPI set coexisting on the system.
And of course, the keks mechanism already
has versioning built into it,
so that will allow you to express
the version that you need,
and will automatically
link up to the right thing.
So it really gives us a mechanism to
control when we introduce a new KPI set,
how it evolves over its lifecycle,
and then when it comes time in
the distant future to obsolete it,
it gives us a way to do that.
I like to think of it as sort of a
conveyor belt of interfaces that,
you know,
we can set to be several years long.
But we'll introduce an interface
and keep it around as long as it
makes sense and is supportable.
All right,
so in our previous operating systems,
any time you linked against
any of these five OS Bundle
libraries or CFBundle identifiers,
you were getting the whole kernel.
Now what we had done is we
subdivided the kernel into four
basic areas because we knew that
We knew that there were these logical
divisions within the code base itself
and the way people were using them,
but we didn't really create
a linkage difference because,
hey, you were linking against the kernel.
So to talk about what each
of them are a little bit,
I think it's fairly obvious if
you look at the header structure
which one of these an API or
KPI is actually being supported by.
Obviously, anything that is part of
the I/O Kit header sub-tree
is part of I/O Kit itself,
and so com apple kernel I/O Kit is
the appropriate one there.
BSD and Mach similarly have their own
name spaces and their own header spaces.
Libkern is something we created
as a common library for all of the
things that the three other main
areas of the kernel needed to share.
Some of the primitives, libc type stuff,
some memory moving, copying,
stuff like that, atomic operations.
Some of the things that you
might think of as BSD-ish,
like, you know,
B copy is not part of BSD.
That's actually part of libkern.
And we'll be providing more guidance
on exactly which one is where
coming up in information very soon.
Okay, so anyway, for all versions of the
kernel prior to 8.0,
when you link against any of these,
you're getting the whole kernel.
So this is the diagram.
I actually have several animations
coming up around this to kind of
show you how this design is evolving.
But fundamentally,
we have the kernel with these
four partitions inside of it,
logically being treated
as a single thing.
And the kernel extension that you
see here in orange is basically a
pure I/O Kit text in that it only
depends on I/O Kit and libkern.
The libkern is allowed
because it's common to all.
Now the problem comes in because you're
linking against the whole kernel.
If you access a symbol that's
considered part of BSD,
let's say, copy in,
or maybe you're using the devfs
to create a device node to
communicate with the utility.
Those things are not part
of libkern or I/O Kit,
and as a result,
you have an undeclared dependency there.
We can't detect the -- we can't
detect it by looking at your plist
because you haven't declared it,
but you're getting it because you're
linking against the whole kernel.
So what we've done for Tiger is
to basically take this entire
collection of interfaces,
symbols, and group it together
into one interface text.
We call it the compatibility text.
Okay.
And all existing kernel extensions that
link against existing versions of the
kernel will link against this in Tiger.
But what we've done is taken the
implementation out of it and moved
it off into a separate place.
So the kernel continues
to be the implementation,
as it always has been,
but when you link against
any of those four areas,
you're getting this compatibility text.
And of course,
all of its symbols are being
resolved by the kernel.
Now the new KPIs,
the things Simon has talked
about and other sessions
WWDC will be talking about,
they're introducing new
interfaces in the kernel.
Those in the final version of Tiger will
not be in the compatibility text.
They will be in new interface libraries,
interface keks.
So again, we have the same four.
We've changed the name to represent
the fact that these are sustainable
kernel programming interfaces.
So com.apple.kernel.kpi.
You're not linking
against the whole kernel,
you're linking against
a single interface.
Okay, so in this case,
if you wanted to have a driver
load against all of those,
you could, but you would have to list
BSD as an explicit reference.
Otherwise, your text would not load
because of undefined symbols.
Now, another thing I need to point
out is we really kind of have
old world and new world here,
and the two coexist on the system fine,
but there's no crossover allowed.
In other words,
you can't write a new style text that
then goes and tries to pick up one or two
old symbols that have been deprecated.
You either need to run
against the old symbols,
or you need to run against the new sets.
The other aspect of this is,
as Simon had mentioned earlier,
we have a lot of symbols
that were exported that we
believe people may be using,
we don't know for sure,
but they're implementation innards,
they're things that we don't believe
Kernel Extension should be getting at.
And in a lot of cases,
they cannot continue to exist.
Changes to the
architecture of the kernel,
semantic changes, make it impossible.
And so what's happened is with Tiger,
a certain number of interfaces,
symbols that have been there
in the past are no longer there
in the compatibility text.
That will break some drivers right there.
The failure mode that you'll
see if you encounter this is an
undefined symbol when you try
to load your kernel extension.
And the only way to remedy this
is to fix your code so that it
doesn't need that interface,
or to port over to the new KPIs,
which obviously we would prefer.
And as the system evolves,
we have made a commitment to
continue supporting the KPIs,
but you can expect as we vary further
and further from the older kernel,
we're going to have more and more
breakage of interfaces that were
never sustainable in the first place.
So you're going to see those
symbols starting to slowly erode.
But again,
we're not doing this because we want
to force people onto new interfaces.
We're only taking them out because we
have to for performance enhancements,
for new features, and so on.
So we obviously want to provide you
a way to move your product forward,
and that would be the KPIs.
Okay, so to sum up, as I had said,
we'll only remove the
symbols that we need to.
The whole point of a
compatibility interface,
KEXT, is to be compatible, right?
So if you have a KEXT that
you've shipped previously,
we would like to see it be
able to load against that.
The reality is if your
KEXT has dependency on BSD,
it probably won't.
If you're doing anything
interesting with BSD,
you're probably hitting on a
symbol that's no longer there,
and we'll need to move
forward to the KPIs.
If you're writing an I/O Kit KEXT,
there's a very good chance
that you won't break,
because you're probably not using
the BSD innards in that case.
But again, until we know exactly
what symbols you're using,
it's very hard for us to tell.
Okay, so to help the users get
through this transition,
what we've realized is we don't really
have a good mechanism to talk to users
about specific kernel extensions.
Giving them a path name is probably
not a very good user experience.
So what we've done is we've defined
two new properties that we'd ask you
to add into your kernel extensions
that are OS bundle product name,
and basically it should be anything that
you would use to identify your product.
If somebody calls your
support line and says,
hey, I've got your product,
what do you need to know to identify it?
We also realized that there are
cases where you have a whole
suite of kecks working together,
and from the customer's perspective,
it's a single product.
Well, if we have problems with
two or three of those,
we really don't want to put three
panels up to the user and say,
you know,
this one and this one and this one.
What we're going to do is
examine these properties,
and if this property is
identical in multiple kecks,
we'll treat it as a single product,
and we will only talk to the user,
with it being a singular thing.
Obviously,
we're not going to scare the user.
We're not going to put panels
up unless the product cannot
be loaded for whatever reason,
but we'd like to be able to talk to
them in a way that's a little cleaner.
We also realize that you might have
a fixed kernel extension available,
and we'd like to make it easy
for the user to get at it.
So if you can add the
OS Bundle product URL,
which again is an optional property, then
If we wind up presenting
a UI to the user,
we might consider including
this as a shortcut so that the
user can go right to a downloads
page or a product support page.
To be honest,
we don't know yet exactly how we're
going to use these properties.
We know that these are there to be
presented to the user in dialogues.
We'll probably have
Apple System Profiler display them,
but we wanted to get this
message out for WWDC.
We don't have the use nailed down yet.
But put it in, and the next time you
ship a kernel extension,
make sure you've got these in there.
[Transcript missing]
On an unrelated note,
I'd like to talk a little
bit about I/O Kit and 64-bit.
As the I/O Kit manager,
I wanted to make this
information available.
We don't have a full I/O Kit session
because the core of I/O Kit has
remained largely the same with Tiger.
Most of our energies have
been focused elsewhere with
the MP work and other things.
But the kernel virtual address
space remains 32-bit in Tiger.
So for I/O Kit kernel extensions,
pointers are still 32 bits.
Now, drivers can get to greater
than four gigabytes of memory,
just like they did in Panther updates
that supported the G5.
And you do that by calling
I/O Memory Descriptor.
And it has various accessors.
Of course, you need to call Prepare.
And what that does is that creates a
mapping between the physical memory,
which may be a large address,
and what we call a bus virtual address.
Basically, it's a 32-bit address that can
be passed around to your device.
You can also, for PIO mode,
you can get directly to
read bytes and write bytes,
and that actually reads
physical memory directly.
So that's how you get the
physical 64-bit address space.
Now for applications talking to I/O Kit,
they can go through any of the
POSIX APIs that have been made available
as part of the 64-bit app support.
So, you know, standard open/close,
read/write I/O control.
So that'll work fine for
networking interfaces,
for the storage interfaces,
and serial as well.
All of those use POSIX.
What it will not support, though,
is direct driver access
through user clients.
And the reason here is that the
I/O Kit user client model and libkern
and everything else about ferrying
data directly between an app and
an I/O Kit driver is all based on CF,
and CF is not being made available
for 64-bit applications at this time.
So stay tuned.
We might be able to
do this in the future,
but for now,
we're focusing more on the 64-bit apps
that are working on large data sets,
and generally they're not also
scanning the bus for USB devices.
All right, with that,
I'd like to hand the podium back over to
Simon to continue with the presentation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Dean.
So I'd like to briefly touch on now is
the lifecycle of a kernel interface.
So, what are the objectives
behind having KPIs?
Well,
we want a set of well-defined interfaces.
And for that, for Apple,
what that means is that we can focus
on making sure that we guarantee binary
compatibility from release to release.
So, for developers,
what that means is that you now
have a stable environment from
release to release that you
can program your solutions to.
We want to have a well-understood path
for change between Apple and developers.
This allows Apple to plan for
kernel evolution so that we
know that we can change things,
we can make plans to add new features,
and we'll know how we can phase this in.
And it also sends a signal to developers
that they know when to start to
migrate from one interface to another.
And we'd like this to be predictable.
We are not going to change
KPIs arbitrarily or gratuitously
just because we happen to think
that the third argument should go
somewhere else or whatever it is.
The only reason to change a kernel
programming interface is because
something is forcing our hand,
because there's new hardware
that is being shipped,
or the technology changes
in hardware all the time.
There may be new, who knows, processors.
[Transcript missing]
So we wanted a lifecycle that really
didn't give you any surprises,
and so we've based the model on
the API lifecycle for applications.
So we basically have four
modes within the lifecycle.
Start off being supported,
which means that the interface
is fully source and binary
compatible from release to release.
This is going to be the state when
Tiger ships of probably every single
interface that we have in the KPI set.
If we find that when we're
looking forward in our
Our development,
we tend to be in engineering,
we are looking a couple of years out.
And we see that there's going to
be problems in a given interface.
For hardware reasons or whatever,
then we will mark an
interface as being deprecated.
What this means is that
when you build your KEXT,
the compiler will start to
generate warnings on its use,
just letting you know that you're
using an interface that we think
we're going to be removing.
The interface is still supported
in terms of it will still work,
but we're just basically giving
you a positive heads-up saying,
you know, this interface is at risk.
And what we're reserving the right
to do is to remove the interface
in the following major release.
After that, we're looking at
obsoleting the interface,
at which point you will no longer be able
to build your KEXT using that interface.
We'll effectively remove the
definitions from the header files,
and there'll be nothing
for you to compile against.
But the binary compatibility
is still assured.
You'll still be able to take
your KEXT and use it on a system.
And then finally,
when we've got to the point where we've
had to implement the given feature,
and we've had to change the kernel,
the interface will become unsupported,
which means that the implementation
behind that interface is
no longer in the kernel,
and therefore the KECs
can no longer load.
So what do we need you to do?
Well, initially we'd like you,
or immediately,
we'd like you to adopt the OS Bundle
product name and the OS Bundle
product URL to identify your KEXT.
If we talk to the user,
the correlation between a KEXT,
"The name as we see it,
which is a path name or
something of that nature,
and the actual user perceived
functionality that it provides
is really not evident.
And so this is a way in which the user
can get a sensible interaction between
the system and your product actually,
so that they can be
identified more reasonably."
We'd like you to download
the session extra material.
It's on connect.apple.com
under session 103,
which is this session.
And look at all the stuff
that we put in there for you,
all the additional documentation.
But more specifically, in the short term,
we would like you to run
Kextract on your KEXT,
and to send the report that Kextract
generates for you to Apple via RadarWeb.
This will allow us to be able to see,
before we even get to Tiger,
what problems we may be creating,
and whether we can actually
alleviate some problems for people.
So I do very strongly
urge you to do that.
I think it will benefit both of us.
Another very important thing to do is,
once you've downloaded
the extra material,
is to review the interfaces.
There is full HeaderDoc for all the KPIs.
And you should bear in mind
when you look at these,
is that these seed
interfaces are evolving.
We're porting our own kernel
extensions as we speak.
We've done some, we haven't done all.
So as we continue porting,
we'll be spotting some limitations
or some things that are missing or
awkwardness in some of the interfaces.
And so we will be changing things,
hopefully not radically,
but just fine-tuning as we go.
So please review those interfaces.
Have a look at the examples
that we have in those extras,
both the file system ones
and the networking ones,
depending on what your text is doing,
and see what changes we've had to make.
I apologize for some of the others.
We have fixed bugs in there,
so there'll be some extraneous changes,
not strictly related to KPIs,
but it should be pretty obvious what
changes are there for the purpose of
using the well-defined interfaces.
faces versus not.
And finally, well not finally,
then I'd like to encourage
you to actually try to port
your text using the KPIs.
It's very important that we understand
your experience with these interfaces,
because we want to be able to
ensure that it will be able to
fully support your functionality.
And finally,
we would like you to give feedback.
There's the kpi-feedback@apple.com
male alias which we are all sitting
and watching and we would like to know
your experience is both good and bad
in other words if you found that moving
your KEXT over was simple then we'd
really like to understand which sets
of KEXT were not having problems and
if you find that there are some things
missing or there's some awkwardness
we would be very interested in that too
because we will do our best to make this
experience as easy as we can for you.
So, more information,
the contact at Apple is Jason Yeo.
He's the Mac OS Technology Manager.
There's his email.
Please let him know of questions
that you may have or any feedback.
Importantly for us in engineering,
the KPI feedback mail list.
I encourage you to let us know your
experiences with using the KPIs.
There's some additional documentation
you can find on the DVD referring
to the network kernel extensions,
API references.
There's some 64-bit transition guides,
a kernel programming document,
There's some additional
documentation for Kernel Extension.
This is on the ADC home website,
going down through Darwin,
some descriptions of libkern,
and there's another document
on network kernel extensions.